---
layout: post
tag: Machine Learning in Practice
category: "machine learning"
title: "Kernels"
description: 
author: Sarah Chen
image: images/posts/photos/IMG-0631.JPG
---
Briefly speaking, a kernel is a shortcut that helps us do certain calculation faster which otherwise would involve computations in higher dimensional space.

Mathematical definition: K(x, y) = <f(x), f(y)>. Here K is the kernel function, x, y are n dimensional inputs. f is a map from n-dimension to m-dimension space. < x,y> denotes the dot product. usually m is much larger than n.

Intuition: normally calculating <f(x), f(y)> requires us to calculate f(x), f(y) first, and then do the dot product. These two computation steps can be quite expensive as they involve manipulations in m dimensional space, where m can be a large number. But after all the trouble of going to the high dimensional space, the result of the dot product is really a scalar: we come back to one-dimensional space again! Now, the question we have is: do we really need to go through all the trouble to get this one number? do we really have to go to the m-dimensional space? The answer is no, if you find a clever kernel.

Simple Example: x = (x1, x2, x3); y = (y1, y2, y3). Then for the function f(x) = (x1x1, x1x2, x1x3, x2x1, x2x2, x2x3, x3x1, x3x2, x3x3), the kernel is K(x, y ) = (<x, y>)^2.

Let's plug in some numbers to make this more intuitive: suppose x = (1, 2, 3); y = (4, 5, 6). Then:
f(x) = (1, 2, 3, 2, 4, 6, 3, 6, 9)
f(y) = (16, 20, 24, 20, 25, 30, 24, 30, 36)
<f(x), f(y)> = 16 + 40 + 72 + 40 + 100+ 180 + 72 + 180 + 324 = 1024

A lot of algebra. Mainly because f is a mapping from 3-dimensional to 9 dimensional space.

Now let us use the kernel instead:
K(x, y) = (4 + 10 + 18 ) ^2 = 32^2 = 1024
Same result, but this calculation is so much easier.

Additional beauty of Kernel: kernels allow us to do stuff in infinite dimensions! Sometimes going to higher dimension is not just computationally expensive, but also impossible. f(x) can be a mapping from n dimension to infinite dimension which we may have little idea of how to deal with. Then kernel gives us a wonderful shortcut.

Relation to SVM: now how is related to SVM? The idea of SVM is that y = w phi(x) +b, where w is the weight, phi is the feature vector, and b is the bias. if y> 0, then we classify datum to class 1, else to class 0. We want to find a set of weight and bias such that the margin is maximized. Previous answers mention that kernel makes data linearly separable for SVM. I think a more precise way to put this is, kernels do not make the data linearly separable. The feature vector phi(x) makes the data linearly separable. Kernel is to make the calculation process faster and easier, especially when the feature vector phi is of very high dimension (for example, x1, x2, x3, ..., x_D^n, x1^2, x2^2, ...., x_D^2).

Why it can also be understood as a measure of similarity:
if we put the definition of kernel above, <f(x), f(y)>, in the context of SVM and feature vectors, it becomes <phi(x), phi(y)>. The inner product means the projection of phi(x) onto phi(y). or colloquially, how much overlap do x and y have in their feature space. In other words, how similar they are.

What are kernels?
A kernel is a similarity function. It is a function that you, as the domain expert, provide to a machine learning algorithm. It takes two inputs and spits out how similar they are.

Suppose your task is to learn to classify images. You have (image, label) pairs as training data. Consider the typical machine learning pipeline: you take your images, you compute features, you string the features for each image into a vector, and you feed these "feature vectors" and labels into a learning algorithm.

Data --> Features --> Learning algorithm

Kernels offer an alternative. Instead of defining a slew of features, you define a single kernel function to compute similarity between images. You provide this kernel, together with the images and labels to the learning algorithm, and out comes a classifier.

Of course, the standard SVM/ logistic regression/ perceptron formulation doesn't work with kernels : it works with feature vectors. How on earth do we use kernels then? Two beautiful mathematical facts come to our rescue:

Under some conditions, every kernel function can be expressed as a dot product in a (possibly infinite dimensional) feature space ( Mercer's theorem ).
Many machine learning algorithms can be expressed entirely in terms of dot products.
These two facts mean that I can take my favorite machine learning algorithm, express it in terms of dot products, and then since my kernel is also a dot product in some space, replace the dot product by my favorite kernel. Voila!

Why kernels?
Why kernels, as opposed to feature vectors? One big reason is that in many cases, computing the kernel is easy, but computing the feature vector corresponding to the kernel is really really hard. The feature vector for even simple kernels can blow up in size, and for kernels like the RBF kernel ( k(x,y) = exp( -||x-y||^2), see Radial basis function kernel) the corresponding feature vector is infinite dimensional. Yet, computing the kernel is almost trivial.

Many machine learning algorithms can be written to only use dot products, and then we can replace the dot products with kernels. By doing so, we don't have to use the feature vector at all. This means that we can work with highly complex, efficient-to-compute, and yet high performing kernels without ever having to write down the huge and potentially infinite dimensional feature vector. Thus if not for the ability to use kernel functions directly, we would be stuck with relatively low dimensional, low-performance feature vectors. This "trick" is called the kernel trick ( Kernel trick ).

Endnote
I want to clear up two confusions which seem prevalant on this page:

A function that transforms one feature vector into a higher dimensional feature vector is not a kernel function. Thus f(x) = [x, x^2 ] is not a kernel. It is simply a new feature vector. You do not need kernels to do this. You need kernels if you want to do this, or more complicated feature transformations without blowing up dimensionality.
A kernel is not restricted to SVMs. Any learning algorithm that only works with dot products can be written down using kernels. The idea of SVMs is beautiful, the kernel trick is beautiful, and convex optimization is beautiful, and they stand quite independent.
